id	date	title	content	created_at	provider	footnotes
4	2025-08-10	The Source and the Consequences	"Lashon hara is where one communicates something negative about another person or something that could cause him loss, harm, or shame. 1 Before beginning the laws of lashon hara, we must first discuss the source of the prohibition and its consequences.
 Source
 Speaking lashon hara constitutes a Torah prohibition, as the verse states, “Do not go talebearing among your nation.” 2 The prohibition includes gossiping and speaking badly about another, 3 and applies whether or not the information is true. 4
 Consequences
 
 Positive
 Hashem wants the best for His creations. One of the most crit- ical values for a good world is peace and harmony, 5 but lashon hara creates disunity and breeds hatred. As such, in His wisdom, Hashem commanded us to keep this commandment in order to promote peace and warmth among people. 6 Moreover, Hashem desires that we become more elevated beings. We are commanded to become more Godly, as the verse tells us, “And you shall walk in His ways.” 7 This entails growth and character devel- opment by becoming more compassionate people. 8 A primary way to achieve this is by elevating our speech. 9 One’s speech impacts his entire character, and so, one who sanctifies himself through his speech will become more Godly. 10
 Negative
 When one speaks badly about another, it has a profound impact. Firstly, the listener now has a new view of the subject. This will often affect the listener’s conduct when he relates to the subject, such as breaking off the friendship or stopping to do business with him. 11 Even when there is no tangible harm, it still causes the listener to think less of the subject. That is all on an individual level. However, lashon hara is also damaging to the entire Jewish nation. In fact, it is the very reason why we are in this long and bitter exile. Our Sages tell us, “Unnecessary hatred caused the destruction of the Beis HaMikdash.” 12 It is only when we rid ourselves of this hatred — which is partic- ularly driven by lashon hara spoken among us — that we will merit the Redemption. 13
 Words of Wisdom
 “For every moment a person keeps silent, he merits a light that no angel nor creation can measure.” 14"	11/08/2025 6:12	Rabbi Daniel Braude	"1. Sefer Chofetz Chaim, Hilchos Lashon Hara 4:1; Rambam (De’os 7:5); Be’er Mayim Chaim, Hilchos Lashon Hara 2:14.
 2. Vayikra 19:16.
 3. Sefer HaChinuch, Mitzvah 236.
 4. Rambam, De’os 7:2. 36 • THE SOuRCE AND THE CONSEquENCES
 5. Pirkei Avos 1:18.
 6. See Sefer HaChinuch, Mitzvah 236. This is a reason for the mitzvah, but it should be noted that we do not know the exact reason for each mitzvah.
 7. Devarim 28:9.
 8. Shabbos 133b.
 9. Sefer Chofetz Chaim, Introduction. The Torah does not explicitly specify that one must not get angry or be cruel. Rather, these are all requirements included in this mitzvah — going in His ways. In contrast, lashon hara is an explicit prohibition.
 10. Based on Iggeres HaRamban.
 11. 66 • DISCuSSING THE RAv AND HIS SERMON
 12. Yoma 9b.
 13. Sanhedrin 98a.
 14. Vilna Gaon, Even Shleima 7:1."